.\" Manual page for lemoniscate(1)
.\" Copy to /usr/local/share/man/man1/lemoniscate.1 (or use `make install-man`)
.TH LEMONISCATE 1 "April 2026" "lemoniscate 0.1.7" "User Commands"
.\" =========================================================================
.SH NAME
lemoniscate \- a Hotline protocol server in C
.\" =========================================================================
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lemoniscate
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B lemoniscate
.B \-\-init
.RB [ \-c
.IR DIR ]
.br
.B lemoniscate
.RB { \-v | \-\-version }
.\" =========================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lemoniscate
is a single-binary Hotline 1.8+ protocol server. It serves chat,
private rooms, file transfers, news (flat and threaded), accounts, and
bans. Optional extensions include HOPE secure login (challenge\(hyresponse
authentication and ChaCha20\(hyPoly1305 / RC4 transport encryption), TLS
on a dedicated port, Mnemosyne content indexing, and persistent public
chat history with cursor pagination.
.PP
The server reads its configuration from a YAML file in a config
directory (see
.BR FILES )
and on macOS additionally from
.IR ~/Library/Preferences/com.lemoniscate.server.plist .
A plist on macOS takes precedence over the YAML when present.
.\" =========================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-interface " " \fIADDR\fR
IP address to bind the listener to. Defaults to all interfaces (0.0.0.0).
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-port " " \fIPORT\fR
Base TCP port for the protocol listener. The file\(hytransfer port is
.IR PORT+1 ;
the TLS ports (when configured) are
.I PORT+100
and
.IR PORT+101 .
Default: 5500.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIDIR\fR
Path to the configuration directory. Used to find
.IR config.yaml ,
.IR Users/ ,
.IR Banlist.yaml ,
.IR Agreement.txt ,
the message board, and threaded news.
Default: current working directory.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-log\-file " " \fIPATH\fR
Append log output to
.I PATH
in addition to stderr. Without this flag, logs go only to stderr.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-log\-level " " \fILEVEL\fR
Minimum log level. One of
.BR debug ,
.BR info ,
or
.BR error .
Default:
.BR info .
.TP
.BI \-\-tls\-cert " PATH"
PEM-encoded TLS certificate. Required (with
.BR \-\-tls\-key )
to enable the TLS listener.
.TP
.BI \-\-tls\-key " PATH"
PEM-encoded TLS private key. The signed binary uses Apple's
SecureTransport on macOS and OpenSSL on Linux.
.TP
.BI \-\-tls\-port " PORT"
TLS listener port. Defaults to base port + 100 (5600 when port is 5500).
The TLS file-transfer port is
.IR PORT+1 .
.TP
.BI \-\-api\-addr " ADDR"
Accepted for command\(hyline compatibility with Mobius. Has no effect.
.TP
.BI \-\-api\-key " KEY"
Accepted for command\(hyline compatibility with Mobius. Has no effect.
.TP
.B \-\-init
Scaffold a default configuration directory at the path given by
.B \-c
(or the current directory if omitted), then exit. Creates
.IR config.yaml ,
.IR Agreement.txt ,
.IR MessageBoard.txt ,
.IR ThreadedNews.yaml ,
.IR Banlist.yaml ,
.IR Files/ ,
and
.IR Users/{admin,guest}.yaml .
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a brief usage summary and exit.
.\" =========================================================================
.SH FILES
.TP
.IR <config>/config.yaml
Server configuration. Annotated template at
.I config/config.yaml.example
in the source distribution. Settings include
.BR Name ,
.BR FileRoot ,
.BR EnableHOPE ,
.BR EnableTrackerRegistration ,
.BR Trackers ,
.BR Mnemosyne ,
.BR ChatHistory ,
.BR TLSCertFile ,
.BR TLSKeyFile ,
and connection limits.
.TP
.IR <config>/Users/*.yaml
One YAML file per account. Includes login, name, password, and the
per\(hybit access bitmap.
.TP
.IR <config>/Banlist.yaml
IP and username/nickname ban list.
.TP
.IR <config>/Agreement.txt
Optional text shown to clients on connect.
.TP
.IR <FileRoot>/ChatHistory/channel-N.jsonl
Persistent chat history, when enabled. Append\(hyonly JSONL with one
message per line. See
.B ChatHistory
in the configuration reference.
.TP
.IR ~/Library/Preferences/com.lemoniscate.server.plist
On macOS, this plist is read at startup. When present it takes
precedence over
.IR config.yaml .
The GUI app writes here.
.\" =========================================================================
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGINT, SIGTERM
Graceful shutdown. Open client connections are closed, in\(hyflight
file transfers are aborted, the chat history file is fsync()\(hyed,
and the tracker registration is dropped (if enabled).
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Trigger a config reload. Implementation is partial; see
.IR docs/SERVER.md .
.\" =========================================================================
.SH PORTS
.TP
.B 5500/tcp
Hotline protocol (plain).
.TP
.B 5501/tcp
File transfers (plain).
.TP
.B 5600/tcp
Hotline protocol (TLS), when configured.
.TP
.B 5601/tcp
File transfers (TLS), when configured.
.\" =========================================================================
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Start with a fresh config in
.IR ~/hotline-server :
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
lemoniscate \-\-init \-c ~/hotline-server
lemoniscate \-c ~/hotline-server \-p 5500 \-l info
.EE
.RE
.PP
Run with TLS on port 5600 and log to a file:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
lemoniscate \-c /etc/lemoniscate \-p 5500 \\
    \-\-tls\-cert /etc/lemoniscate/cert.pem \\
    \-\-tls\-key /etc/lemoniscate/key.pem \\
    \-\-tls\-port 5600 \\
    \-f /var/log/lemoniscate.log \-l info
.EE
.RE
.PP
Enable persistent chat history (opt\(hyin) by adding to
.IR config.yaml :
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
ChatHistory:
  Enabled: true
  MaxMessages: 10000
  MaxDays: 30
  LegacyBroadcast: true
  LegacyCount: 30
  LogJoins: false
.EE
.RE
.\" =========================================================================
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Server exited cleanly (e.g. via SIGINT) or
.B \-\-help
/
.B \-\-version
/
.B \-\-init
completed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
Fatal error during startup or runtime (binding the port failed,
config could not be parsed, etc.). See stderr.
.\" =========================================================================
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR config/config.yaml.example " (annotated configuration reference),"
.br
.IR docs/SERVER.md ", " docs/LINUX.md ", " docs/SECURITY.md
.br
.IR docs/Capabilities-Chat-History.md " (chat history protocol spec),"
.br
.IR docs/MNEMOSYNE.md " (search index integration)."
.\" =========================================================================
.SH BUGS
Report issues at
.UR https://github.com/fuzzywalrus/lemoniscate
.UE .
.\" =========================================================================
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Gant and contributors. Based on the Mobius Hotline server by
Jonathan Halter
.RB ( https://github.com/jhalter/mobius ).
